What’s all this?
I said one suitcase.
I need choices, Jay.
Colombia’s not one
of your more formal nations.
The guy on their money’s
sitting in a lawn chair.
Ay. I cannot believe
that my little baby’s
leaving me.
You know, I left the glass doors
open downstairs,
so right now
your actual baby
may be leaving.
Ah, ah, ah!
One robe.
I guess we know what everyone
will be talking about
my second morning there.
Manny’s visiting Gloria’s family
for about a month– I hope.
I just got to get him on
a plane...
before Gloria has a meltdown
and changes her mind.
’Cause if he doesn’t go to
Colombia, Colombia comes to me.
It’s happened before.
[ All Shouting ]
Gloria!
[ Shouting Continues ]
Oh, my God. Oh, my God!
What?
Oh, it’s Mitchell.
We won.
Oh, that’s great!
What we won?
It’s fantastic.
We’ve waited so long.
- What did we won?
- The Supreme Court ruling.
Gay marriage is legal.
¡Ay!
Congratulations.
Thanks, Gloria.
Can I talk to Cam?
Uh, yes. Hold on.
It’s–
Thank you. Yeah.
It’s Mitchell. Hi. Hey.
I gotta go, but can you believe
this finally happened?
I know. It’s amazing.
We’ll celebrate tonight.
I love you.
- Celebrate what?
- Oh. Well, Jay,
hold on to your hat,
but as of today in California,
it’s legal for a man
to marry another man!
[ Joe Spits Up ]
Ew. He threw up.
He just needs some time
to get used to the idea, honey.
It’s so great, Cam.
Yeah, I’m happy for you guys.
Gloria, Manny needs
his birth certificate
to reenter the country.
Any idea where it is?
I don’t know.
Oh, that’s right.
He leaves today.
You must be a wreck.
She’s not a wreck. She’s a rock.
I looked and it’s not
in the safe.
This one had her first
sleepover last week.
I just had to tough
my way through it.
He picked me up in the dark.
I can’t find
that birth certificate
anywhere, Jay.
[ Gasps ]
Maybe it’s a sign and–
It’s a sign we need
a refresher meeting...
on what goes in the safe.
Here’s a preview–
no shoes.
I looked online,
and we can get a copy
if we go to the courthouse.
That’s what we’re gonna do.
In the car.
We’ll be back in an hour.
Hey, Cam.
Congratulations.
Go, gay marriage!
[ Chuckles ]
[ Joe Spits Up ]
He did it again.
Ay. Sí.
Okay.
Well–
♪ Hey, hey ♪
♪ Hey ♪♪
So tell me, Cam.
How does it work
when it is between two men?
Well, I don’t really feel
comfortable talking about that
in front of Lily.
I know how that works.
I rented the wrong movie once.
Did you see
Glen, Garry, Glenn and Ross?
Uh, no.
Why don’t you go play?
What I mean is,
who proposes to who?
I don’t know.
We’ve talked about it–
if it ever became legal.
Okay, and now it is.
So are you going to do it today?
It just happened.
I haven’t really had–
You have to do it today.
Every couple deserves
a beautiful proposal story.
Well, I have always adored
my mom and dad’s story.
He plowed "Will you marry me?"
into a snowy field
right outside of her window.
And then he tried to recreate it
for their 25th
wedding anniversary,
but there was no snow, so he
burned it into a cornfield.
Bad idea.
But Mama did get a second ring
out of it with the FEMA money.
Ay. I wish I also had
a romantic story.
One day, we were watching TV
before dinner, and Jay says,
"Manny, hand me that thing."
And Manny gives him the ring.
I was very happy, of course,
but it’s not the best story.
At least Javier
was on top of a dolphin.
[ Claire ]
Soldiers talk
about that moment...
when they shut off,
when the war finally wins.
[ Gunfire On TV ]
[ Luke ] Get down!
[ Alex ] Shut up!
I can’t see the TV!
[ Alex Coughs ]
Turn the fan on!
[ Haley ]
Stop yelling!
My head’s going to explode!
[ Claire ]
For me, that moment is
four days into summer vacation.
Hey, honey.
What’s up?
Do you remember when summer
meant fireflies...
and cutoff shorts
and ice cream trucks?
Well, one out of three.
We’ll get our time.
They’re all going away
at some point, right?
Yeah. Haley’s got
her beach trip,
and Alex is doing Habitat
for Humanity and Luke has camp.
If I remember, I think we have
six hours totally kid-free on–
Oh, the 14th.
If we moved Alex’s flight,
we could have, like,
10 or 12 hours.
Dream bigger, hot pants.
Step aside.
Sometimes I don’t know if I love
how much I fear Claire
or fear how much I love her.
Oh.
I have 22nd
to the eighth for Alex.
Luke to the 14th.
Haley gets a day there.
Come on.
That’s it, beautiful mind.
Harness that crazy
into something positive.
Shh. If we can get Alex to move
her Habitat for Humanity
from Oklahoma to Sacramento...
and Luke to move
his camp session,
they will both overlap
with Haley’s vacation,
and I just bought us
seven kid-free days.
Witchcraft!
Yeah.
[ Cameron ]
I’ve outdone myself, Gloria.
I booked the restaurant
from our first date,
the same table
overlooking the ocean,
and I’ll do it at sunset,
which I’ve recently discovered
is my ideal lighting.
- That’s so romantic.
- I know.
Isn’t it?
[ Call Waiting Beeps ]
Oh. Oh! Oh, okay.
Oh, that’s Mitchell.
Gotta go.
Oh, don’t let him hear
the excitement in your voice.
You’re right.
[ Line Beeps ]
[ Gruffly ]
What?
[ Mitchell ] I’m at
that coffee shop on Third,
and I forgot my wallet.
Can you come bail me out?
Oh, isn’t this convenient?
It actually was.
I was only two blocks away.
[ Chuckles ]
But when I got there,
I realized it was all a ploy
so he could propose.
But it was so sweet,
I just decided to ditch my plans
and let him do it.
Mitchell, I’m so sorry,
but there is a massive pileup
on the 405,
and, well, I have
to go pick up Lily.
Maybe you could just call
Claire or something?
Cam. Cam. I got, like, 50 cents
to my name.
- [ Sighs ]
- Have you decided on a tea?
Um–
Do they all cost the same?
Yeah.
[ Chattering ]
[ Jay ]
Look at that line.
Probably everybody getting
their gay marriage license.
I think it’s just called
a marriage license.
Yeah, I don’t know.
- Maybe we should go home
and forget about it.
- What?
I’ve been reading up on some
of those tropical diseases–
malaria, yellow fever, rabies.
Mm-hmm.
I’m high risk, Jay.
I’m a big hand shaker.
You’re fine.
You’ve had all your shots.
And that Paco Rabanne
will scare away
any mosquitoes.
Jay, I’m scared.
I’m not sure
I want to go through with it.
We didn’t drive
all the way down here
for that piece of paper...
for you to get cold feet
at the last second.
And what happened anyway?
You’ve been looking forward
to this day for months.
I know, but maybe we should wait
until next year.
I’m still kind of young
to be doing this.
We’re not waiting.
I already paid for you,
and your mother signed off.
This is happening.
Great day, huh?
[ Sighs ]
[ Man ]
That’s disgusting.
Hello!
Oh, thank God.
Mm-hmm.
I’ve had so many
cups of tea,
they gave me
my own one of these.
Oh.
Here you go.
So congratulations
on the whole
marriage thing.
How amazing is that, right?
Yeah. We gonna hear some
big gay wedding bells soon?
Well, just wedding bells.
Mmm.
Yeah, yeah. Of course.
We’ve always talked about it.
But you know,
it’s just a matter of
finding the right timing.
And then there’s
a couple of other factors–
tax implications
and estate planning.
Oh, stop.
I’m swooning.
I’m just being practical.
You’re the same way.
You told Phil to take back
your engagement ring
and buy you a washer/dryer.
Don’t put this
back on me.
Come on.
What is Cam’s biggest
complaint about you?
You’re not romantic.
This is your opportunity.
Mitchell, you should go home
tonight and surprise him
with a big, splashy proposal.
He would really like it
if I proposed to him.
Mm-hmm.
I guess I could stop after work
and pick up a card and–
- Oh, my God.
You’re hopeless.
- I know.
Mitchell, okay.
This is what you do.
Okay.
It really should be
your own idea though.
No, come on. Come on.
I need help.
Please.
Fine. Okay.
Tonight you cook him
his favorite meal.
You open
the best bottle of wine.
And just as the two of you
are sitting down to enjoy it,
you break up with him.
What? Why?
Because then,
as he is at his lowest,
you pop the question.
He goes from agony
to ecstasy!
It’s so romantic.
- You’re kidding, right?
- More traditional?
Y–
All right.
You look
into his eyes...
and you say, "I saw a doctor.
He found a small dark mass."
- What are you?
- And then just as
he begins to cry,
you pull out a black box
with the ring in it.
There’s your
small dark mass!
It’s genius!
Y-You’re a disaster.
You could go
the disaster route too.
Did you ever hear
how I told Phil
we were gonna have Luke?
I said, "Thousands of children
die every day."
Dad?
I’m sorry.
Was I being proud of you
too loud?
- What are you doing?
- Going off to Habitat,
helping all those people.
Honey, I’m speechless.
Thanks.
I just thought it was–
But are we sure about Oklahoma?
There’s so many needy people
right up in Sacramento.
And it’s driving distance.
I already signed up
for my work detail,
and I’ve been e-mailing
with my tentmate.
Yeah.
No, you’re right.
I guess it’s just–
No.
[ Laughs ]
Never mind.
- What is it?
- No. It’s stupid.
I’ve just never been so far away
from my baby girl before.
Not now, waterworks.
Not now.
Oh, Daddy.
[ Sobbing ]
You okay, Dad?
Oh, hey, buddy.
Never been better.
You’re so thoughtful.
I’m gonna miss that when you
go off to camp on the 14th.
Little Wiffle golf?
Wait. I can’t go
to camp on the 14th.
I have to go when Carly’s going.
- Who’s Carly?
- Shh!
She’s this girl I like,
and she’s here right now.
Well, all the more reason
to change camp sessions.
Absence makes
the heart grow fonder.
It’s foolproof.
Not this fool.
Forget it.
What about all the new girls
you’re gonna meet?
You’re only 14.
Do you really
wanna be tied down?
Yes!
Oh, Luke.
Watch. I-I got it.
Okay.
[ Laughs ]
Nice!
Oh, hi, Mr. Dunphy.
Sorry we moved
the furniture around.
I was showing Luke
the flip I did
at tumbling sectionals.
[ Car Horn Honks ]
Oh, no.
That’s my mom.
But I can leave you guys
this old movie I brought over.
It’s called Dirty Dancing.
Never let her go.
[ Scoffs ]
Hey, Carly’s mom.
Phil Dunphy.
Big fan of your daughter.
[ Children Fighting ]
Thank you.
So, heads up– Luke’s got to
change his camp session.
You guys may want
to do the same.
No!
My husband and I have been
working the whiteboard all week,
and we just bought three days
away from that.
[ Boy Grunts ]
- [ Boy ]
Ow! It wasn’t even me!
- Bank it!
Carly!
[ Horn Honks ]
Okay, Manny.
Remember, as soon as you land,
watch out for Malaria.
Why?
I got a shot for that.
Can we hurry this up?
No. I’m talking
about your cousin Malaria.
She’s coming to pick you up,
but she might have Rubella.
What?
That’s her daughter,
but make room in the car because
she could have diphtheria.
Who’s Diphtheria?
Ay, Manny,
diphtheria is a disease.
That’s why I want you to be
apart from her in the car.
Let’s go, Gloria.
Better say good-bye here.
He’s got to hurry
to get through security.
But there’s no line.
For now.
A senior tour bus
just pulled up.
You know how much
private wanding that is?
Half their skeletons
are metal.
Ay, Manny, please.
Call me as soon as you land.
I’ll miss you.
And we’re walking.
I love you!
Wait.
No. Up!
I forgot to give Mom
this card I wrote.
No, no.
I’ll handle it.
Safe trip, buddy.
Safe trip.
- We’re out of here.
- No. Let’s wait
until he gets to the top.
¡Adiós, mi amor!
Who wants ice cream?
Huh?
What if he never comes back?
Oh, honey, no one
ever leaves home
and doesn’t come back.
I did.
Hey, honey.
I’ve been mulling over
your Sacramento decision.
- It wasn’t exactly my–
- Of course I want
my baby girl close,
but I gotta get used
to you leaving.
Because college–
and knowing you,
a great college–
is right around the corner,
am I right?
[ Laughing ]
Now Habitat will look good
on an application,
but does Sacramento
really move the needle?
I have another place in mind.
Little hint–
It starts with an "El."
El Salvador?
Are you serious?
They have
an unstable government,
earthquakes–
Boats.
Looks like there’s a hill.
I’m just saying, you don’t push
yourself at this stage, you wind
up at a second-tier college.
Soon you’ve lost
all your ambition.
You’re just drifting
through life,
hoping someone offers you
an M.R.S. degree.
Is that who you want to be?
Hey, princess.
Second breakfast?
Fun.
[ Chuckles ]
So big beach trip
coming up, huh?
Yeah.
Can’t get better
than late July,
unless it’s early August–
Save it, Dad.
I know you and Mom want
the house to yourselves.
Nope.
I’m the last piece
of the puzzle, right?
- What’s it worth to you?
- Fine.
How about I pay for gas
and two dinners?
Mmm.
Gas, all dinners,
groceries,
two new bathing suits,
a Boogie board–
- Are you crazy?
- No. I’m also not done.
Yes, you are done.
You know why?
You know another way
this shakes out?
You don’t go.
That’s right.
Overplay your hand,
I pull the plug,
you blow your last chance
for a good time
with your friends.
Word gets out
that you’re not cool,
then school starts.
You end up with your nose
in a book all year.
No friends, no dates,
not caring how you look.
Is that who you want to be?
[ Cameron ]
Turns out Mitchell really had
forgotten his wallet,
so proposing
wasn’t even on his radar.
My plan was bulletproof.
He was gonna be as blindsided
as the fattest hog
on Founders Day, and I was–
Pretty darn proud of myself.
[ Chuckles ]
I had the ideal proposal.
Cam once told me
that all he wanted...
was someone to sit
in a rocking chair
and grow old with, and–
So while we’re at dinner,
Claire is setting up
two rocking chairs...
next to the fireplace
with a bottle of champagne.
Oh.
He is going to–
Squeal like a Berkshire white
in a four-man pig toss.
Gosh durn it,
I miss Founders Day.
[ Mitchell ]
This is a little bit fancy
for just a quick bite.
Well, who knows if they can
even get us in?
Let me check.
[ Clears Throat ]
Reservation for Tucker.
Is everything set up
with the table?
[ Snaps Fingers ]
Yeah.
Oh.
[ Mitchell ]
The restaurant where we had
our first date,
the sunset lighting
that Cam loves.
[ Clicks Tongue ]
He was going to propose.
I was so touched,
but at the same time,
he was ruining the one chance
I had for romantic redemption.
Oh, I’m feeling
really queasy, Cam.
No, you’ll be okay
once we sit down.
I think I need to go home.
Sorry.
[ Clatters ]
Oh! Excuse me.
Sorry. No, no, no.
We’ll get you some ginger ale
and some crackers.
Mm-mmm.
I gotta run
to the restroom.
You-You grab the car.
You’ll feel better
after you throw up!
Okay, new plan.
We’re coming back early.
- Is everything set up?
- You said two hours.
We haven’t even left yet.
Well, hurry!
Just stall.
Tell him that...
Haley had a hemorrhage,
and you’re her blood type,
so you–
I’m not doing that, you ghoul.
Just get back to the house and–
- Gloria.
- Cam. How did it go?
Did you–
It didn’t happen.
I have to go
with the backup plan.
Fortunately, I had
an alternate proposal scenario
in case there was a problem.
Jay and Gloria were babysitting,
so I asked them to recreate the
picnic under the stars we had...
the night we moved into
our first apartment.
[ Giggles ]
Mitchell would take
one look and–
Sob like a Tony winner.
I got the picnic basket,
but you know what is going
to be hard to find?
My interest
in this whole damn thing?
No. The blue and white
tablecloth.
Here it is.
It was in the occasion closet.
They keep their tools
in a pillowcase, but they have
an occasions closet.
[ Door Opens ]
What are you guys
doing here?
Oh, Cam is going to propose
to Mitch, so we’re here
to help him set it up.
That is coconuts.
Mitchell asked us
to do the same thing for him.
That just makes me want
to stay and see how
this whole thing works out.
We can. Let’s set it up,
and then we’ll hide
somewhere.
Ay, yes, in the occasion closet.
No. We do what they asked
and leave.
We never had these problems.
This is what happens
when they let men marry men.
[ Joe Spits Up ]
That cannot be a coincidence.
I’m sorry about the detour.
I was just worried about
the pileup on the 405.
Oh, take your time.
The drive’s
actually soothing me.
[ Loud Bang ]
Oh!
Oh, my gosh!
Oh! Wh-What was that?
I think it’s
a blown tire.
It’s okay.
I know there’s a spare.
Do-Do we have the tools?
Yeah, yeah.
They’re in the pillowcase
in the trunk.
Right.
Why do you have to be
so grouchy?
We’re giving them
a beautiful story.
Everybody deserves one.
I’m an idiot.
No, you’re not
an idiot.
You’re not as romantic
as some–
These things peel off
on the back,
and I’ve been gluing ’em.
Why do I even bother?
You don’t care about this stuff.
What’s that supposed to mean?
Yeah, like when you proposed
to me–
"Hey, Manny,
hand me that thing."
That’s my whole story.
Hang on.
That wasn’t my fault.
I had something big planned.
You asked him for the ring.
I was asking for the remote.
He jumped the gun.
He was supposed to give me
the ring later that night
at the restaurant.
The waiter was gonna come by
and offer coffee.
I was gonna say, "No, thank you.
It’ll keep me up, and lately
I’ve been loving my dreams.
And there’s one in particular
I hope comes true."
Manny gives me the ring.
I say, "Gloria"–
Yes, Jay!
Yes, I marry you!
[ Laughs ]
I love my new story.
Little heads-up–
there’s no way I’m not crying
at this wedding.
Phil, you cried
on the way here.
I was on the brink already.
I watched Dirty Dancing
before we left.
I know.
[ Cell Phone Chimes ]
Text from my dad.
Oh, no.
He wants me to come visit him
for a couple of days,
but it’s right in the middle
of our kid-free week.
Oh, that’s too bad,
but I guess you could take
two days, hmm?
I may have mentioned to Frank
that Phil might be available
that week.
The only thing better
than a kid-free week...
is a couple of days carved out
just for Mama.
Perfect.
Yeah.
Hey, you remember the day
I proposed to you?
Of course I do.
I don’t remember
the exact date, but yes.
March 19, 1994.
Oh, yeah.
I was in such a bad mood
that afternoon.
I was on day two
of a St. Patrick’s hangover.
I don’t remember that.
Mmm.
I just remember
how crazy in love I was.
- Mmm.
- I couldn’t wait
to ask you.
♪♪ [ Piano Instrumental ]
I even ran a red light
on the way to pick you up.
I still have the ticket.
No, you don’t.
Why would you save
something like that?
Are you kidding me?
I was racing to my life.
It’s in a box at my dad’s
with a bunch of other stuff–
The program from that concert
where I met you.
[ Exhales ]
The matchbook
with the fake number on it
you gave me.
The souvenir goblet
from our first date.
You really think I’d throw away
all those beautiful memories,
milady?
I haven’t seen that stuff
for a long time.
I gotta dig it out
when I see my dad.
- Okay, stop. Sorry.
- What?
I told your dad to call you...
because I wanted some time
for myself.
Yeah. Couple of days away
from my perfect,
romantic husband,
who is far too good
for this coldhearted,
bloodless wife-bot.
Hey, hey, hey, hey.
You have blood.
Honey, I just put the chairs
in front of the fireplace.
You made it romantic.
Mitchell’s right.
I’m a ghoul.
Come here.
You’re romantic too,
in your own funny way.
We’re just different.
Mmm.
So what if I’m
more sentimental?
[ Cell Phone Chimes ]
[ Groans ]
My mom.
I mean, sure,
marriage needs romance.
You know
what it also needs?
"Spoke to Phil,
and he suggested"–
Forgiveness.
[ Gasps ]
[ Cameron Grunts ]
Okay. Spare, please.
Yes, Doctor.
Can’t believe this has
happened to us so many times,
we actually have a system.
Oh, I know. You’ve come
a long way from the first time
you ever saw a jack.
Remember, you couldn’t believe–
I’m sorry.
This is amazing.
I am lifting
a car right now.
I’m the strongest man
in the world.
[ Laughs ]
Oh. Do you remember
that time in Yosemite
when it was snowing so bad?
Yeah. What was that,
like, six years ago?
Oh, gosh, no.
It was before Lily,
so it was at least seven
or eight.
God, it is–
It’s going by so fast.
Yeah.
You’re telling me.
[ Sighs ]
You know, it’s a different
world down there
than it was 24 hours ago.
Hmm.
Cam, tire.
Tire!
[ Cameron ]
Oh, my gosh.
Oh, my– Oh, my God.
Oh, my God!
[ Crash ]
It’s gonna be a different
world for the people
in that yellow house.
[ Both Laughing ]
This is not at all
how I saw the evening going.
Oh. Honey,
you have no idea.
Do you remember
our first apartment?
Yes. What–
What made you think of that?
I don’t know.
The stars.
All right. Come on.
Let’s do this.
Yeah.
[ Groans ]
[ Grunts ]
Yes.
Hey, there.
You with the stars
on your thighs.
Huh?
It’s an old song.
I thought I would–
Ah, why do I bother?
What is this?
Oh, that’s from Manny.
I was hoping to wait
and give it to you in
a couple of days, but, uh–
Just remember
that he’s fine.
He’s only
a plane ride away.
Nice. I’m going to wash my face.
Okay.
I hope that my cousins
don’t take him riding the horses
or shooting the guns.
I know that he’s almost a man,
but–
[ Sniffles ]
- Jay?
- "Make sure you take care
of Jay.
Please call me after his checkup
on Thursday.
I’ll miss you guys so much."
- Nice, huh?
- Nice?
I’m gonna mail him
his other robe.